A Clockwork Orange, The Picture of Dorian Gray and Youth

Perhaps it is inevitable that an adult, writing through the filter of seniority, will find that they have expressed only their perceived negative understanding of what being young is to those who are. The theme of youth as a topic for literary exploration offers authors a variety of sub-themes to use as core ideas in their novel. These could be transitional (growth and realisation, coming of age and the loss of innocence) or focussed on the advantages of being young (beauty and freedom). In many cases, however, a less positive direction is taken, enabling the writer to question the moral disparity between young and old and the effects a lack of responsibility and accountability can have on a person’s actions.
This essay will discuss the ways in which Oscar Wilde and Anthony Burgess use their narrative to explore the aspects of juvenility. Both take what seems to be a conflicted stance on the benefits and detriments of being young initially and come to a similar conclusion only in their final chapters. I will decide whether I believe aforementioned conclusions to be positive or negative.

Dorian and Alex, though evil, are endearingly youthful; readers and, in the case of Dorian, lesser characters are encouraged to ignore their moral shortcomings. In our first encounter with Alex we are introduced to his crude and nonsensical manner of description. With it he will force on us accounts of rape, murder and torture at his own hands or the hands of others. Curiously, however, his initial addresses of the audience “What’s it going to be then?” and ‘O my brothers’ are friendly and jovial. As the former is also a question to his ‘droogs’ the reader is immediately assimilated into his gang and, as a result, feels an uneasy but important bond with him. It is this intense, vaguely conspiratorial relationship and his use of childlike phrases like ‘eggiweg’ and ‘jammiwam’ that are in the front of our minds when he is beaten by policemen, molested by inmates and tortured by a totalitarian government. His immaturity, though grating at times, is enough to remind us that the boy being abused is 15 years old.
There are fewer instances of the conspicuous, childish affectations that comprise Alex’s voice in Dorian’s (omitting the occasional petulant exclamation; ‘“You must lend me these, Basil,” he cried’ or ‘“I don’t wish to be unkind, but I can’t see you again. You have disappointed me.”’) and yet threats to him affect us as readers as much as they do for Alex. His appeal is in his response to situations and people. From Alex there was rarely any uncertainty; he was always unashamedly vicious while Dorian, particularly in the early stages of the book, is perpetually unsure. His brief discussion with Lord Henry leaves him feeling as if his life has become ‘fiery coloured to him’ and as if he had always been ‘walking in fire’. It is almost comically dramatic and telling of how delicate his beliefs are. It cannot be said that either author creates a character that is morally good and yet they are both hard to completely condemn, a quality lent to them, in part, by their youth. Wilde and Burgess do not appear to be taking a sympathetic stance on the subject of youth and violence, perhaps they are simply tying their readers more closely to Dorian, Alex and, in turn, the narrative.

Though the allure of youth is studied in far greater detail in The Picture of Dorian Gray than in A Clockwork Orange, both novels manage to lend a similar glamour to the protagonists and their horrific crimes. Dorian is a member of the elegant social elite and as a result of this and being younger than many of the people in said elite class he is made the subject of more than one romance with equally beautiful, young people. Alex’s gang allegedly inspired many crimes after the novel was remade as a film and introduced to a wider audience including the beating of a 15 year old by an older boy dressed in the costume Alex describes at the beginning of the novel. As repulsive as both often are it is easy to be drawn in by their exciting and exotic lifestyles.
Previously explored in this essay was the idea of Alex’s narrative voice being used as a method for endearing him to an audience. Another property of his form of expression is its crude poeticism and the effect that it has on our perception of him. His most eloquent moments are of course when he is under the control of the classical music he loves ‘And then, a bird of like rarest spun heavenmetal, or like silvery wine flowing in a spaceship, gravity all nonsense now, came the violin solo above all the other strings, and those strings were like a cage of silk round my bed’ but even in the middle of a violent episode his tone is light, playful and fluid. It is only after his incarceration and mental shackling that he is verbally dulled and the wit he displayed in speech and description is stripped from him. The life he recounts following the Ludovico technique feels muted and soulless. An instance of this is his own beating at the hands of the reformed Dim and former enemy Billyboy ‘I will not go into what Billyboy and Dim did to your humble narrator. [...] but it was all like panting and thudding against this like background of whirring farm engines’. We cannot feel that his crimes are forgivable simply because his youth makes him seem perversely attractive and interesting but we can be disappointed when he is made unimaginative and boring. Dorian, in this respect, can be taken as a very obvious and physical representation of how captivating youthfulness can be and the dessicated, hideous monster of a corpse he leaves behind upon his demise can be loosely equated to Alex's muted wit.

It could be argued that in youth people are more easily controlled and can be swayed to new ways of thinking faster than those with more experience and cynicism. Of the two protagonists Dorian is the most easily influenced of the two; a short 'strange panegyric on youth’ is enough to disturb him on a very fundamental level. For Alex, however, the path that authority is forced to take in pursuit of his compliance is fraught with the failure of conventional methods. A Clockwork Orange is ultimately a novel about the imposition of unnatural control over people and yet its chosen protagonist is one with such an ineradicable identity that he caves to the passificism they force on him only under torture. Different arguments are perhaps being made by Wilde and Burgess on the subject of external influence on youth.
The Yellow Book’s is the tool with which Dorian’s character is corrupted “he passed from chapter to chapter, a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of the falling day and creeping shadows” and it's simple, lacklustre name is a testament to how small and insignificant a catalyst has to be to change Dorian.
The contrast between the Yellow Book and the equipment used to alter Alex’s behaviour is obvious. ‘And then I found they were strapping my rookers to the chair-arms and my nogas were like stuck to a foot-rest. It seemed a bit bezoomny to me [...] I tried to smeck’ shows that even Alex, in a compromising position, recognises that the sheer effort is expended ‘curing’ him is comedically excessive. Rather than a delicate, naive mind, being insidiously corrupted by a book and a new friend Alex’s youth and evil is wild and must be strapped to a metal chair and tortured.

Duality plays a role in both novels: natural and unnatural, Dorian’s upper class life and his covert, unsavoury one and, interestingly, young and old between which there is a conflict that is present in both novels though most prevalent in A Clockwork Orange. The first crime committed by Alex and his droogs in the first chapter is the beating of an elderly man who they treat with contempt calling him a ‘creeching old veck’ and ‘filthy minded old skitebird’ and we are introduced to the idea that there is an innate battle between young and old. This is continued throughout however tonally speaking it develops; by the end Alex feels a need for the maturity that comes with age and its solidity. Wilde is far less explicit on the subject of this conflict. There are few mentions of competition between youth and old age and all are very one-sided. Lord Henry’s attack on the mundane and, by extension, the old is a theme throughout the novel: “Don’t squander the gold of your days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure” and the irony of being told these things by someone who’s age advances throughout the novel noticeably makes the idea more poignant. The novels together express youth’s fear of age and its subsequent lashing out towards it and old age’s ignorance and subsequent disdain of youth.

The first impression given by A Clockwork Orange is that youth is without the moral restrictions that come with age. This is seen many times throughout the novel in his remorseless beatings of the elderly and the rape of younger victims. The end of the controversial final chapter alludes to a different point being made. ‘one of these malenky toys you viddy being sold in the streets, like little chellovecks made out of tin and with a spring inside and then a winding handle on the outside and you wind it up grrr grrr grrr and off it itties, like walking’ is not a description of youth that abides by the free callousness that is immediately presented. Instead it suggests uniformity and a conformity to a predetermined future that appears similar to fate. Later in the passage a further description ‘it itties in a straight line and bangs straight into things bang bang and it cannot help what it is doing’ suggests that not only is the ‘toy’ devoid of freedom, it (Alex) is also lead to commit the crimes it does because of its youth. Suddenly the main theme of the novel; the imposition of control on people, is a result of his age rather than the tyrannical government.
The final chapter of Wilde’s novel is similarly negative about youth though it contains very little of A Clockwork Orange’s sentiment. Where Burgess reflects on the rigid path on which youth forces people Wilde declares it ‘sickly’ and ‘shallow’. In a sense this makes Wilde’s novel more true to the idea that youth is less restricted by morals as it does not pretend that being young forced Dorian's actions but instead that it liberated him of the deeper, more human qualities of respect for human life and things greater than appearance. In his case he was not forced into evil by youth; he was given the tools to become it himself.

The Picture of Dorian Gray and A Clockwork Orange are not necessarily novels written to express absolutes and so an evaluation of Burgess and Wilde’s intent when writing on the subject of youth, its advantages and its disadvantages cannot necessarily provide a definite sense of the authors’ net arguments. Despite this it would be incorrect to conclude without solid summations of key points made by them. I do not believe that either author intended to attack young people and it seems unlikely that inciting a negative shift in public opinion of youth would have driven them to write the novels they did but it is impossible to ignore the conclusive chapters. Dorian; frenzied by his epiphany that the pursuit of youth drove him to moral degradation and Alex; pensively, bleakly allowing his teenage years to become a traditionally structured 'Bildungsroman’ story complete with self-reflective personal development. I cannot see enough of an attempt on the part of either author to argue that youth is conducive to a person being morally sound.
